If you look at today's text, let him that thinks he is standing beware that he doesn't not fall.
What is that especially warning against? Is it not overconfidence?
What could cause a pilot to neglect to carefully follow his safety checklist before takeoff?
Again, overconfidence. What could cause a Christian to fail to regularly check the depth of his spirituality?
Again, overconfidence. So, this being said, let's discuss the theme, never become overconfident.
Now, even though there's no age restriction, especially young ones need to beware of the snare of overconfidence.
Now, you can see this tendency of younger ones to be overconfident in how some of them will recklessly maneuver a motorcycle at very high speed through heavy traffic.
Feeling they're invincible. You can almost tell how old you are about how fast they go through the traffic there.
Open up please to Proverbs chapter 14.
And even though this scripture doesn't put any age restriction, the point being made that nobody can overconfidently think he's immune to overconfidence.
Now, you have to think about that statement. Look at Proverbs 14, but young ones especially have to beware, but there's no age restriction here.
Verse 16, though wise one is cautious and turns away from evil, but the stupid one is reckless and overconfident.
So, obviously, we don't want to be in the camp of the stupid one, do we? That one is reckless and overconfident.
We want to be cautious and turn away from evil. Now, using this scripture as a foundation for our discussion, what are some cautions?
Because, you know, it says the wise one is cautious. What are some cautions that can help us from being, or keep us from being overconfident?
Well, let's quickly discuss three. One, never overconfidently think we can take unauthorized liberties. Now, let's just talk about this for a moment.
Now, here's two contrasting examples. Think of Aza. Now, no one knows to touch the arc of the covenant, but he reached out and grabbed whole of it, didn't he?
Well, Jehovah struck him dead for this unauthorized liberty that he took. In contrast, think about David. Now, David, even though he had a perfect opportunity to kill Saul, his men were encouraging him to do it, he refused to touch the anointed of Jehovah.
He even felt bad that he had disrespectfully touched the garments of the anointed of Jehovah. So, he knew he had not been authorized to kill Saul.
So, he stayed in his place, he waited on Jehovah. And what a fine example for us. And I'm sure we can all think of in regard to this first caution, we can think of application for here at Bethel and our congregation, even in our family.
Let's get our second caution. Never overconfidently presume on Jehovah's mercy. Now, let's think about this.
An example of this could be the ones that think they'll leave the truth for a while. They'll have some fun in this world, they'll enjoy some selfish desires, and then they'll come back later to Jehovah.
And Jehovah will take them back, Jehovah will forgive them. But now, isn't that very risky? Isn't that a reckless course? In fact, it makes me think of the story of the dog we had on the farm when I was about 11 or 12 years old.
He was a good dog. We loved him. His name was Wheeler. But one night, there was a pack of wild dogs that came through the valley where we lived.
And Wheeler took off with these wild dogs. Now, we couldn't understand it because we took such good care of him. I asked Dad, why? Why would he do that?
Well, my father said, maybe there's a female in the pack. Maybe he just wants to have fun for a while, but I'm pretty sure he'll come home.
Well, he did come home about a week later, but he was all chewed up. He had been in a horrible fight with one or more of the other dogs apparently in the pack.
And he barely made it back to his doghouse. It took him a couple of weeks. He slowly recovered. He never had the same strength that he had previously.
But now, here's a really sad part of the story. About two years later, another pack of wild dogs came through. And again, he ran off with them. Now, we couldn't believe it.
This time, he came back even, he was gone longer. And he couldn't even make it back this time to the doghouse. We found him in the next morning in the yard.
And my brother and I gently carried him to his doghouse and about a day later, he died in that doghouse. Now, we cried. We couldn't believe it.
Now, he was just a dog. But if you think about that story, some of our young ones really remind you of that dog, Wheeler.
They're so well cared for by those that love them, especially Jehovah, but they think you're missing out on fun.
And so they will run with the world for a while, thinking probably in the back of their head, they're going to come back to the truth later.
But how foolish, how recklessly may none of us even slightly think this way and may we help others, and especially our young ones, to never foolishly reason this way.
But one more caution, a third, never overconfidently rely on ourselves. Solomon, apparently, that was his downfall.
He knew he was not to increase the number of horses, increase wives. See, he was not ignorant. He knew, but somehow he must have rationalized. He was an exception.
See, he was strong enough. He was wise enough. He could handle it. Well, that was the pride before the crash, wasn't it?
Or what about Peter? Apparently, his downfall. In effect, he said, all the others may have weaknesses in their faith, but not me, Lord. I'll never fail you.
But this overconfident, self-reliant, I am more faithful than they are attitude, was followed by a terrible crash.
And that makes us think of Paul's words at 2 Corinthians 12-10, when I am weak, then I am powerful. See, when we're weak, we know we have to depend on Jehovah. That's really when we're the strongest.
But when we think we're strong, like Peter, that's generally when we're relying on ourselves. And that's when we're the weakest, see.
In contrast to Peter, Solomon, Jesus, never overconfidently relied on himself. And that's why he never crashed. Look at Luke chapter 22.
Just one more thought here about right before his betrayal and death. See, notice how he was certainly not relying on himself, even though you could say he had billions of years of faithful service under his belt.
Verse 41, he withdrew from them about a stone-throw away. He bent his knees and began to pray, saying, Father, if you want to, remove this cup from me.
Nevertheless, let not my will but yours take place. Then an angel from heaven appeared to him and strengthened him. But he was in such agony that he kept praying more earnestly.
And his sweat became as drops of blood falling to the ground. Now just recently, I noticed that, and thought about this point, that even after the angel strengthened him, he didn't say, well, I've been strengthened. Now I'm good to go.
No, he prayed even more intently. Truly the opposite of overconfidence. So there we have three cautions.
Never overconfidently think we can take unauthorized liberties in Jehovah's organization. Number two, never overconfidently presume on Jehovah's mercy.
And number three, never overconfidently rely on ourselves. Now if we observe these cautions, we'll never join the camp of the stupid ones who are reckless and overconfident.
And number three, never overconfidently presume on Jehovah's mercy.